Presumptive Disability Law in Hawaii Presumptive Health Initiative CODE PART: Hawaii Revised Statutes Service-connected disability retirement Hawaii Legislative Website DESCRIPTION: Sec. Sec. 88-79 Service-connected disability retirement. In the case of firefighters, police officers, and sewer workers, the effect of the inhalation of smoke, toxic gases, chemical fumes, and other toxic vapors on the heart, lungs, and respiratory system shall be construed as an injury received or disease contracted while in the performance of their duty and as the result of some occupational hazard for the purpose of determining occupational disability retirement under this section. Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, any condition of impairment of health caused by any disease of the heart, lungs, or respiratory system, resulting in permanent incapacity to a firefighter, police officer, or sewer worker, shall be presumed to have been suffered in the actual performance of duty at some definite time and place through no willful negligence on the firefighter’s, police officer’s, or sewer worker’s part, and as a result of the inherent occupational hazard of exposure to and inhalation of smoke, toxic gases, chemical fumes, and other toxic vapors, unless the contrary be shown by competent evidence; provided that such firefighter, police officer, or sewer worker shall have passed a physical examination on entry into such service or subsequent to such entry, which examination failed to reveal any evidence of such condition. ß386 – Medical care, services, and supplies for controverted claims. In the event of a controverted claim, the injured employee’s private health care plan shall pay for or provide medical care, services, and supplies in accordance with the private health care contract. When the claim is accepted or determined to be compensable, the employer shall reimburse the private health care plan and the injured employee in amounts as authorized by this chapter and rules adopted by the director. ß386 – Medical care, services, and supplies for firefighters suffering from cancer. If a claim for leukemia, multiple myeloma, non-Hodgkin lymphoma, or cancer of the lung, brain, stomach, esophagus, intestines, rectum, kidney, bladder, prostate, breast, female reproductive organs , or testes filed by an employee with five or more years of service as a firefighter is accepted or determined to be compensable, section 386-21 shall remain applicable; provided that the employer shall be liable for medical care, services, and supplies for a minimum of one hundred ten per cent, and not to exceed one hundred fifty per cent of fees prescribed in the Medicare Resource Based Relative Value Scale applicable to Hawaii as prepared by the United States Department of Health and Human Services.