Presumptive Disability Law in Iowa Presumptive Health Initiative CODE PART: TITLE IX LOCAL GOVERNMENT SUBTITLE 4 CITIES CHAPTER 411 RETIREMENT SYSTEM FOR POLICE OFFICERS AND FIRE FIGHTERS 411.1 Definitions 411.6 Benefits Iowa Legislative Website DESCRIPTION: 411.1 Definitions 6. "Cancer" means prostate cancer, primary brain cancer, breast cancer, ovarian cancer, cervical cancer, uterine cancer, malignant melanoma, leukemia, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, bladder cancer, colorectal cancer, multiple myeloma, testicular cancer, and kidney cancer. 10. "Fire fighter" or "fire fighters" shall mean only the members of a fire department who have passed a regular mental and physical civil service examination for fire fighters and who shall have been duly appointed to such position. Such members shall include fire fighters, probationary fire fighters, lieutenants, captains, and other senior officers who have been so employed for the duty of fighting fires. 11. "Infectious disease" means HIV or AIDS as defined in section 141A.1, all strains of hepatitis, meningococcal meningitis, and mycobacterium tuberculosis. 411.6 Benefits 5. Accidental disability benefit. Service-connected disability retirement. Upon application to the system, of a member in good standing or of the chief of the police or fire departments, respectively, any member in good standing who has become totally and permanently incapacitated for duty as the natural and proximate result of an injury or disease incurred in or aggravated by the actual performance of duty at some definite time and place, or while acting pursuant to order, outside of the city by which the member is regularly employed, shall be retired by the system if the medical board certifies that the member is mentally or physically incapacitated for further performance of duty, that the incapacity is likely to be permanent, and that the member should be retired. However, if a person's membership in the system first commenced on or after July 1, 1992, the member shall not be eligible for benefits with respect to a disability which would not exist, but for a medical condition that was known to exist on the date that membership commenced. A medical condition shall be deemed to have been known to exist on the date that membership commenced if the medical condition is reflected in any record or document completed or obtained in accordance with the system's medical protocols pursuant to section 400.8 , or in any other record or document obtained pursuant to an application for disability benefits from the system, if such record or document existed prior to the date membership commenced. A member who is denied a benefit under this subsection, by reason of a finding by the medical board that the member is not mentally or physically incapacitated for the further performance of duty, shall be entitled to be restored to active service in the same position held immediately prior to the application for disability benefits. If a member in service or the chief of the police or fire departments becomes incapacitated for duty as a natural or proximate result of an injury or disease incurred in or aggravated by the actual performance of duty at some definite time or place or while acting, pursuant to order, outside the city by which the member is regularly employed, the member, upon being found to be temporarily incapacitated following a medical examination as directed by the city, is entitled to receive the member's full pay and allowances from the city's general fund or trust and agency fund until re-examined as directed by the city and found to be fully recovered or until the city determines that the member is likely to be permanently disabled. If the temporary incapacity of a member continues more than sixty days, or if the city expects the incapacity to continue more than sixty days, the city shall notify the system of the temporary incapacity. Upon notification by a city, the system may refer the matter to the medical board for review and consultation with the member's treating physician during the temporary incapacity. Except as provided by this paragraph, the board of trustees of the statewide system has no jurisdiction over these matters until the city determines that the disability is likely to be permanent. Disease under this section subsection shall mean heart disease or any disease of the lungs or respiratory tract and shall be presumed to have been contracted while on active duty as a result of strain or the inhalation of noxious fumes, poison, or gases. Disease under this subsection shall also mean cancer or infectious disease and shall be presumed to have been contracted while on active duty as a result of that duty. However, if a person's membership in the system first commenced on or after July 1, 1992, and the heart disease, or disease of the lungs or respiratory tract, cancer, or infectious disease would not exist, but for a medical condition that was known to exist on the date that membership commenced, the presumption established in this paragraph "c" shall not apply. The requirement that a member be in good standing to apply for and receive a benefit under this subsection may be waived for good cause as determined by the board. The burden of establishing good cause is on the member.